# The EasyDAB v2 Board
# What is it?
The EasyDAB v2 board is a DAB Radio exciter. It allows you to broadcast a digital radio signal compliant with DAB/DAB+ specifications that can be received on compatible DAB Digital Radios sold across Europe, certain parts of Asia and Australia.

# What is DAB?
DAB stands for Digital Audio Broadcasting, it is standard for broadcasting a digital radio signal in 55 countries around the world. It's the result of a European research project and publicly released in 1995 with consumer grade radios appearing in the late 90s. 

DAB found its earliest successes and populized widly across the UK thanks to the efforts of Pure, who manufacturered a variety of radios at a price point that was reasonable to the average consumer. The BBC and other broadcasters in the UK rapidly embraced the standard and by the early 2000s there were two national multiplexes as well as around 5 regional multiplexes broadcasting which allowed a user within range of a DAB transmitter to pick up around 40-60 radio stations broadcasting a mix of audio dramas, talk/news radio, sports as well as vast array of stations broadcasting a dynamic range of music genres. 

DAB however had a number of false starts and was abandoned in a number of other countries and only later found success with the launch of DAB+, a revision to the original standard which utilizes AAC-MP4 a codec that doubles the efficiency of transmitted audio, allowing multiplex operators to double the number of stations broadcast with no reduction of audio quality. Some countries are making plans to discontinue the use of FM radio in favor of DAB with Norway becoming the first country in the world to switch off FM broadcasts in favor of DAB+ in 2017.

The original standard of DAB utilizing MPEG-1 Layer II audio is starting to fall into disuse, the UK remaining the only country with regular DAB broadcasts with most commercial stations having switched over to the more efficient DAB+ standard. At present only the BBC National Stations as well as a small handful of commercial stations continue to broadcast in the older standard. DAB+ cannot be used by radios manufactured to the original standard and is likely to be a source of significant electronic waste in the UK.

The disuse of the original standard and the subsequent tsunami of electronic waste generated by the disposal of the earlier DAB radios popularized in the 2000s in the UK drove me to sink my teeth into this project by carrying out small-scale original DAB broadcasts here in Washington State. I'm originally from the UK, but moved over to the Pacific Northwest in 2018 bringing my DAB radios with me. They've been effective paperweights the last few years, but with this project I hope to bring them back to life, as well as preserve a selection of Pure Radio models released in the 2000s. At present I own a Pure Evoke 1, Pure Tempus 1S, Pure PocketDAB 1500 and a Pure DRX-601EX serial number 391. The Pure DRX-601EX was the first semi-portable DAB radio released, but at a high price point of GBP 500 and accordingly few were sold. DAB became popularized with the release of the Pure Evoke 1, the first sub GBP 100 DAB radio, meaning that everyone was able to get on board with DAB in the early 2000s in the UK.

# What about the Americas? 
Okay, I had to put this question in as I'm based in the US. No country in the Americas uses DAB at the time of writing. The US and Canada instead adopted Ibiquiti's IBOC (In Band On Channel) standard, officially known to the FCC as NRSC5, and to the general population as HD Radio. HD Radio is a very different standard to DAB whereby HD Radio will sandwich an analog FM or AM signal allowing the receiver to dynamically switch between analog and digital as signal conditions permit. 

DAB on the other hand uses Band III (174Mhz-240Mhz) with a wider carrier, this allows more stations to be broadcast on a single frequency and works better for countries with more centralized broadcasting approaches, while IBOC suits the highly decentralized radio market of the US. 

Of an interesting note, Canada originally did small scale experimentation with DAB on the L Band, however this was abandoned in favor of using the same standard as the US. Utilization of the L Band was removed from the DAB specification in January 2017. 

Digital Terrestrial Radio has seen lesser usage in the US and Canada due to the popularization of Satellite Radio on the L Band thanks to SiriusXM. 
Band III in the US is allocated for VHF System M Digital TV Channels 7-13 (174Mhz-216Mhz) as well as Amateur, Land Mobile, Fixed in the 216-240Mhz ranges.

# How does the EasyDAB v2 Board Work?
The EasyDAB v2 board requires a DAB Multiplex (also known as an Ensemble) to be configured and running on a server, this can be acheived by using the OpenDigitalRadio (ODR) Tools, specifically ODR-AudioEnc to process an audio source into a compatible format for DAB use and ODR-DabMux to build an Ensemble. Additionally you may want to use ODR-PadEnc to provide Programme Additional Data to your broadcasted stations. For reference, a multiplex/ensemble is a collection of audio and data services packaged together and provided in a ZMQ or ETI stream to be received by the EasyDAB board.


The EasyDAB board has a Xilinx Spartan 6 FPGA configured to handle the DAB modulation after which it sends the data to a Digital Synthesiser to generate the digital frequency. It then passes through a mini baulin to step up the frequency strength, through either a low pass filter or a band pass filter (Depending on your config), through a Low Noise Amplifier and out to a SMA Jack to a broadcast antenna. The generated signal can then be received on DAB/DAB+ hardware. 

If you are using a Low Pass Filter, you can load alternative firmware onto the board to broadcast FM or Digital Radio Mondiale signals. 
